---
title: "Development of a Comparative Genomics-Driven Knowledge Graph Framework for Translational Research"
collection: talks
type: "Plant & Animal Genome Conference (PAG) - Comparative Genomics Workshop"
permalink: /talks/2024-01-13-talk1-pag
venue: "Town & Country Resort and Conference Center"
date: 2024-01-13
location: "San Diego, CA, US"
---

Cross-species knowledge transfer, or translational research, can greatly enhance research breakthroughs. The two main methods for linking species and enabling translational research are the identification of syntenic regions using bridge genetic markers, or the direct genome-wide identification of orthologous genes when genome sequences are available. The latter approach has become increasingly popular as sequencing costs have fallen. New tools that use phylogenetics to more precisely identify appropriate sets of orthologs are rapidly replacing traditional reciprocal BLAST hits. As closely related species share larger collinear chromosomal regions, synteny can assist in the identification of correct orthologs when dealing with complex gene families. We have recently developed a pipeline to identify syntenic orthologs for translational research. Comparative genomics is now at the heart of a recently released framework called Ortho_KB, which integrates inter-species connections into a Neo4j graph database along with functional annotation, genetic and -omic data as nodes and relationships. With these layers of information, the identification of functional orthologs can be supported by comparing expression profiles and domain annotations of genes. The integrated synteny can then be used to compare the positions of quantitative trait loci (QTL) across traits and/or species. We will describe the current and planned features of Ortho_KB to demonstrate how intuitive modelling of biological data can facilitate knowledge transfer and comparison between species. We will also present OrthoLegKB, a dedicated instance for legume species that uses this framework to investigate the genetic and molecular determinants of response to biotic and abiotic limiting factors.